---
layout: post
title:  "The Law of Attraction"
categories: [ wonderworks ]
image: assets/images/lawofattraction.jpg
featured: false
hidden: false
---

When I stumbled upon this theory in a documentary many years ago, I was barely aware of its prominence in the world. I had certainly heard of quotes that relate to it, but I was blissfully ignorant about it for a very long time. So when I did come across it, I couldn’t stop thinking about it- whether it really works, and if it did, was this it? Was this answer to all our problems? The answer couldn’t be that simple, could it?

I started reading up a little more about it, to be more informed and here are 3 fundamental things you need to know about Law Of Attraction before you incorporate it into your life. I have practiced it in my own life once so far, and yes, it did work.For months I was trying to get my passport renewed in India where it kept getting stuck for some reason or the other and we needed it to be renewed well before my wedding so I could travel back with my husband right after the wedding. A bride to-be does not need more added stress in her life at that point, but I did and I was really down in the dumps when I decided to give LOA a real chance in my life. I really had nothing else going for me anyway. The real struggle was keeping the faith even when things kept going wrong constantly. I think we are wired to assume that if a change has to happen, it should be instant. I am still discovering it along the way, I do know that trust in the Law of Attraction is a very important element in it all. So let us trust, and read up:

1. **Positive Language**: This is probably the most important one of them all, the very basic but also the most complicated. It is important to know that Law of Attraction gravitates towards either the positive language or the negative language you use- even if in both cases, you are thinking about overcoming an obstacle or even getting over mundane daily activities. For example, instead of saying “I can never get a good parking spot!”, go for “I hope I get a nice parking spot tomorrow”. Law of Attraction is based very highly on the type of language we use, not only the words we say out loud, but also the ones we think to ourselves. The LOA is based on the universe being attracted to the vibrations of positive or negative thinking/speaking/feeling, and give back exactly what you gave it. And yes, it is harder than it seems. This in fact, was the most challenging aspect for me and I consider myself a fairly optimistic person. But to exercise this when you are down in the dumps or when nothing is going right, now that is a challenge. Tip: Be conscious of what you are thinking or saying. If you catch yourself using negative language, correct yourself and re-phrase.
2. **Have a vision**: A very important aspect of LOA succeeding, is to visualize what you want. This helps you have a specific goal in mind when attracting it toward yourself rather than a vague one, which will probably hamper your chances of succeeding. In the case of the parking spot example, visualize an empty parking spot in the garage, each time you visualize, try to be as detailed as possible. The very famous documentary on LOA, The Secret shows that this exercise actually helped a man find a parking spot in his very crowded parking lot at work, almost every day.
3. **Be reasonable with your goals**: If you set unrealistic goals or deadlines, it’s not going to happen. This is Law of Attraction, not a magic spell- so you need to remember to set practical goals that can be accomplished in the required time frame. So yes, there may be times when you won’t get the same parking spot every single day and that’s okay. If you can get a spot most times, you are still doing a whole lot better than before!

Like I mentioned before, I am still discovering LOA myself, however, I can safely say that during one of the most stressful times of my life last year, LOA pulled me, picked me up and gave me the kind of strength I most needed at the time. I learned that, patience and trust go hand in hand when it comes to LOA and as long as you are following the “Law” properly vis-à-vis the points mentioned above, you are on the right track and the Universe will sort itself out. There’s a lot more to be said about Law of Attraction of course, it is a Science in itself and I hope to learn a lot more about it along the way, and may be I’ll stop by and update some more when I do.

